.TH "EBUILD" "1" "October 24, 2002" "portage 2.0.42" "Portage"
.SH "NAME"
ebuild \- manual page for the ebuild program, a low level interface to the Portage system. 
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B ebuild
.I file command [command]\fR...
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
The ebuild program is the heart of the current implementation of the Portage system.  Accepting an ebuild script and one or more commands as arguments, the ebuild program will parse the ebuild script and execute the specified commands.  Commands exist to fetch sources, unpack sources, compile sources, install object files into a temporary directory "image", merge the image to the local filesystem, create a bzipped tarball package out of the image, and more.
.SH "FILE"
This must be a valid ebuild script.  For further information read \fBebuild\fR(5).
.SH "COMMANDS"
.TP
.BR check
Checks to see if all build dependencies are satisfied.
.TP
.BR clean
Cleans the temporary build directory that Portage has created for this particular
ebuild file.  The temporary build directory normally contains the extracted source
files as well as a possible "install image" (all the files that will be merged to the
local filesystem or stored in a package).  The location of the build directory is set
by the BUILD_PREFIX variable.  For information on how to override this variable, see
\fBmake.conf\fR(5).

Note: Currently, Portage doesn't clean up everything after a package has been created
or merged. The majority is removed, but failed compiles may remain. This means that
the BUILD_PREFIX directory will accumulate some files that you probably don't want.
Manual cleaning (`rm \-rf /var/tmp/portage/*` will take care of this).  An option in
make.conf allows you to control whether BUILD_PREFIX gets cleaned automatically or
gets left as is: AUTOCLEAN="yes" (can be yes, or no).
.TP
.BR fetch
Checks to see if all the sources specified in SRC_URI are available in DISTDIR
(see \fBmake.conf\fR(5) for more information) and have a valid md5
checksum.  If the sources aren't available, an attempt is made to download them from
the locations specified in SRC_URI.  If multiple download locations are listed for a
particular file, Portage pings each location to see which location is closer.  The
Gentoo Linux mirrors defined by GENTOO_MIRRORS is always considered first.
If for some reason the current or just\-downloaded sources' md5 digests don't match
those recorded in files/digest\-[package]\-[version\-rev], a warning is printed and
ebuild exits with an error code of 1.
.TP
.BR digest
Creates a digest file for the package in /usr/portage/[category]/[package]/files/.
This digest file lists the md5sum's of all the files found in the SRC_URI.  If the
fetched source of the package is corrupt/bogus in some way, the md5sum will catch
this.
.TP
.BR unpack
Extracts the sources to a subdirectory in the \fIbuild directory\fR (BUILD_PREFIX) by
running the \fIsrc_unpack()\fR function in the ebuild file.  If no src_unpack()
function has been specified, a default src_unpack() function is used that extracts
all the files specified in SRC_URI.  The sources are normally extracted to
${BUILD_PREFIX}/[package]\-[version\-rev]/work. This particular directory can be
referenced by using the ${WORKDIR} variable.  If you're creating an ebuild, you'll
want to make sure that the S (source directory) variable defined at at the top of
your ebuild script points to the directory that contains your extracted sources.
Normally, this directory is ${WORKDIR}/${P}, and is defined that way by default, so
it is not often required.  The src_unpack() function is also responsible for making
the appropriate patches to the sources so that they're ready for compilation.
.TP
.BR compile
Compiles the extracted sources by running the the \fIsrc_compile()\fR function
specified in the ebuild file.  When src_compile() starts, the current working
directory will be set to ${S}.  When src_compile() completes, the sources should be
fully compiled.
.TP
.BR install
Installs the package to the temporary \fIinstall directory\fR by running the
\fIsrc_install()\fR function.  When completed, the \fIinstall directory\fR
(${BUILD_PREFIX}/[package]\-[version\-rev]/image) will contain all the files that
should either be merged to the local file system or included in a binary package.
.TP
.BR qmerge
This function installs all the files in the \fIinstall directory\fR to the live
filesystem. The process works as follows: first, the \fIpkg_preinst()\fR function (if
specified) is run.  Then, the files are merged into the live filesystem, and the
installed files' md5 digests are recorded in
\fI/var/db/pkg/${CATEOGRY}/${PN}\-[version\-rev]/CONTENTS\fR.  After all the files
have been merged, the \fIpkg_postinst()\fR function (if specified) is executed.
.TP
.BR merge
Normally, to merge an ebuild, you need to \fIfetch\fR, \fIunpack\fR, \fIcompile\fR,
\fIinstall\fR and \fIqmerge\fR.  If you're simply interested in merging the ebuild,
you can use this command, which will perform all these steps for you, stopping along
the way if a particular step doesn't complete successfully.
.TP
.BR unmerge
This function first executes the \fIpkg_prerm\fR function (if specified).  Then it
removes all files from the live filesystem that have a valid md5 checksum and mtime
in the package contents file.  Any empty directories are recursively removed.  Finally,
it runs \fIpkg_postrm\fR function (if specified).  It is safe to merge a new version
of a package first and then unmerge the old one.  In fact, this is the recommended
package upgrade method.
.TP
.BR package
This command is a lot like the \fImerge\fR command, except that after fetching,
unpacking, compiling and installing, a .tbz2 binary package tarball is created and
stored in  ${PKGDIR}/All (${PKGDIR} defaults to /usr/portage/packages).  A symbolic
link is created in ${PKGDIR}/${CATEGORY} that points to the package in ${PKGDIR}/All.
.TP
.BR rpm
Builds a RedHat RPM package from the files in the temporary \fIinstall directory\fR.
At the moment, the ebuild's dependency information is not incorporated into the RPM.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ebuild (5),
.BR make.conf (5)
.TP
The \fI/usr/sbin/ebuild.sh\fR script. 
.TP
The helper apps in \fI/usr/lib/portage/bin\fR.
.SH "FILES"
.TP
\fB/etc/make.conf\fR 
Contains variables for the build\-process and overwrites those in make.defaults.
.TP 
\fB/etc/make.globals\fR 
Contains the default variables for the build\-process, you should edit \fI/etc/make.conf\fR instead.
.SH "AUTHORS"
Achim Gottinger <achim@gentoo.org>
.br
Daniel Robbins <drobbins@gentoo.org>
.br
Nicholas Jones <carpaski@gentoo.org>
.br
Mike Frysinger <vapier@gentoo.org>
