.TH "FLAG-O-MATIC" "5" "Jun 2003" "Portage 2.0.48" "portage"
.SH "NAME"
flag\-o\-matic \- manipulate CFLAGS/CXXFLAGS easily and reliably
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
The \fBflag\-o\-matic\fR eclass contains a suite of functions to
manipulate the CFLAGS/CXXFLAGS variables.
.SH "FUNCTIONS"
.TP
.BR "append-flags " "\fI<flags>\fR"
Add extra flags to the current CFLAGS/CXXFLAGS.
.TP
.BR "filter-flags " "\fI<flags>\fR"
Remove particular flags from CFLAGS/CXXFLAGS.  This function will
only match complete flags.
.TP
.BR "filter-mfpmath " "\fI<math types>\fR"
Remove specified math types from the fpmath specification
If the user has -mfpmath=sse,386, running `filter-mfpmath sse`
will leave the user with -mfpmath=386.
.TP
.BR "get-flag " "\fI<flag>\fR"
Find and echo the value for the given flag.
.TP
.BR "is-flag " "\fI<flag>\fR"
Returns true if flag is in CFLAGS or CXXFLAGS.
.TP
.BR "replace-flags " "\fI<orig-flag>\fR \fI<new-flag>\fR"
Replace all occurences of original flag with new flag.
.TP
.BR "strip-flags"
Strip CFLAGS/CXXFLAGS of everything except for flags known to
be good flags.  Users of stable profile are limited to these flags:
.br
.I "-O -O1 -O2 -mcpu -march -mtune -fstack-protector -pipe -g"
.br
Users of unstable profile are allowed the above flags and these flags:
.br
.I "-Os -O3 -freorder-blocks -fprefetch-loop-arrays"
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Please report bugs via http://bugs.gentoo.org/
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ebuild (5),
.BR make.conf (5)
.SH "FILES"
.BR /usr/portage/eclass/flag\-o\-matic.eclass
.SH "AUTHORS"
Mike Frysinger <vapier@gentoo.org>
.SH "CVS HEADER"
$Header$
