.TH "GCC.ECLASS" "5" "Jun 2003" "Portage 2.0.51" "portage"
.SH "NAME"
gcc \- functions to get commonly needed info about gcc
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
The \fBgcc\fR eclass contains a suite of functions that are used to
glean information about the version of gcc that is used to compile.  
This allows developers to worry about gcc specs rather than figuring
out how to find the specs in the first place.
.SH "VARIABLES"
.TP
.B WANT_GCC_3 = \fI"[yes|no]"\fR
In the cases where multiple versions of the gcc compiler are
installed (say gcc-2.95.3 and gcc-3.2.1), you can specify that
you want to get information about gcc-3.x when calling the functions
listed below.
.SH "FUNCTIONS"
.TP
.B gcc-getCC
Returns the name of the C compiler binary.  Usually 'gcc'.
.TP
.B gcc-getCXX
Returns the name of the C++ compiler binary.  Usually 'g++'.
.TP
.B gcc-fullversion
Returns the version as by `$CC -dumpversion`.
.br
GCC \fI2.95.3\fR will return \fI2.95.3\fR
.br
GCC \fI3.2.1\fR will return \fI3.2.1\fR
.TP
.B gcc-version
Returns the version, but only the <major>.<minor>.
.br
GCC \fI2.95\fR.3 will return \fI2.95\fR
.br
GCC \fI3.2\fR.1 will return \fI3.2\fR
.TP
.B gcc-major-version
Returns the Major version.
.br
GCC \fI2\fR.95.3 will return \fI2\fR
.br
GCC \fI3\fR.2.1 will return \fI3\fR
.TP
.B gcc-minor-version
Returns the Minor version.
.br
GCC 2.\fI95\fR.3 will return \fI95\fR
.br
GCC 3.\fI2\fR.1 will return \fI2\fR
.TP
.B gcc-micro-version
Returns the Micro version.
.br
GCC 2.95.\fI3\fR will return \fI3\fR
.br
GCC 3.2.\fI1\fR will return \fI1\fR
.TP
.B gcc-libpath
Returns gcc's internal library path.
.TP
.B gcc-libstdcxx-version
Returns the full version of libstdc++.so.
.TP
.B gcc-libstdcxx-major-version
Returns the Major version of libstdc++.so.
.TP
.B gcc2-flags
Export CFLAGS and CXXFLAGS that are compadible with gcc-2.95.3.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Please report bugs via http://bugs.gentoo.org/
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ebuild (5)
.SH "FILES"
.BR /usr/portage/eclass/gcc.eclass
.SH "AUTHORS"
Mike Frysinger <vapier@gentoo.org>
.SH "CVS HEADER"
$Header$
