.TH "PORTAGE" "5" "Jan 2004" "Portage 2.0.50" "Portage"
.SH NAME
portage \- the heart of Gentoo
.SH DESCRIPTION
The current portage code uses many different configuration files most of which 
are unknown to users and normal developers.  Here we will try to collect all 
the odds and ends so as to help users more effectively utilize portage.  This 
is a reference only for files which do not already have a man page.
.IP Note:
If you are looking for information on how to emerge something, please see 
.BR emerge (1).
.SH SYNOPSIS
.TP
.BR /etc/
make.globals
.br
.BR make.conf (5)
.TP
.BR /etc/make.profile/
deprecated
.br
make.defaults
.br
packages
.br
packages.build
.br
use.defaults
.br
use.mask
.br
virtuals
.TP
.BR /etc/portage/
bashrc
.br
package.mask
.br
package.unmask
.br
package.keywords
.br
package.use
.br
mirrors
.br
categories
.TP
.BR /usr/portage/profiles/
arch.list
.br
categories
.br
package.mask
.br
thirdpartymirrors
.br
use.desc
.br
use.local.desc
.br
use.mask
.TP
.BR /var/cache/edb/
virtuals
.br
world
.SH GLOSSARY
In the following sections, some terminology may be foreign to you or used 
with meaning specific to Portage.  Please see the referenced manpages for 
more detailed explanations.
.RS
.TP
.B DEPEND atom
A string which matches a package.  It is of the form category/package.  
It may also contain optional logical operators and versions.
.br
More reading: 
.BR ebuild (5)
.TP
.B KEYWORD
Each architecture has a unique KEYWORD.
.br
More reading: 
.BR ebuild (5)
.TP
.B virtual
A DEPEND atom that is part of the "virtual" category.  They are used 
when different packages can satisfy a dependency and only one of them is 
needed.
.br
More reading: 
.BR ebuild (5)
.RE
.SH SPECIFIC FILE DESCRIPTIONS
.TP
.BR /etc/
.RS
.TP
.BR make.globals
The global default settings for Portage.  This comes from the portage package 
itself.  Settings in \fBmake.conf\fR override values here.  The format 
is described extensivly in \fBmake.conf\fR(5).
.TP
.BR make.conf
The global custom settings for Portage.  See \fBmake.conf\fR(5).
.RE
.TP
.BR /etc/make.profile/
This is usually just a symlink to the correct profile in 
\fB/usr/portage/profiles/\fR.  Since it is part of the portage tree, it 
may easily be updated/regenerated by running `emerge sync`.  It defines 
what a profile is (usually arch specific stuff).  If you need a custom 
profile, then you should make your own \fB/etc/make.profile/\fR 
directory and populate it.  However, if you just wish to override some 
settings, do NOT edit these files because they WILL be lost with the 
next `emerge sync`.  See the section below on \fB/etc/portage/\fR for 
overriding.
.RS
.TP
.BR deprecated
The existance of this file marks a profile as deprecated, meaning it is 
not supported by Gentoo anymore.  It contains the name of the profile 
to which users are encouraged to upgrade.
.TP
.BR make.defaults
The profile default settings for Portage.  Format  described in 
\fBmake.conf\fR(5).
.TP
.BR packages
This file serves two purposes.  The first is to mask out specific 
packages/versions on a per-profile basis.  The second is to provide the 
list of packages that compose the special \fIsystem\fR class.

.I Format:
.br
\- comments begin with #
.br
\- one DEPEND atom per line of what to mask OUT
.br
\- packages to be added to the system class begin with a *
.br
.I Note:
In a cascading profile setup, you can remove packages in children 
profiles which were added by parent profiles by prefixing the atom with 
a '-'

.I Example:
.br
# i am a comment !
.br
# only allow versions of glibc less than 2.3
.br
<sys-libs/glibc-2.3
.br
# add any version of bash to the system class
.br
*app-shells/bash
.br
# only allow versions of readline earlier than 4.2
.br
# and add it to the system class
.br
*<sys-libs/readline-4.2
.TP
.BR packages.build
A list of packages (one per line) that make up a stage1 tarball.  Really only 
useful for stage builders.
.TP
.BR use.defaults
Here we DO NOT define the default USE flags, but the so-called auto-USE 
flags.  This rather unknown portage feature activates a USE flag if a 
specific package is installed and the flag was not explicitly 
deactivated.  This file contains the associations between USE flags and 
packages that trigger the auto-USE feature.  

In other words, if we never put "sdl" or "-sdl" into our USE, but we 
have media-libs/libsdl emerged, then portage automagically sticks "sdl" 
into our USE for us.

.I Format:
.br
\- comments begin with #
.br
\- one USE flag per line with a list of DEPEND atom bases

.I Example:
.br
.br
# media-libs/libsdl will activate "sdl"
.br
sdl        media-libs/libsdl
.br
# activate tcltk only if we have both 
.br
# dev-lang/tcl and dev-lang/tk
.br
tcltk      dev-lang/tcl   dev-lang/tk
.TP
.BR use.mask
Some USE flags don't make sense on some archs (for example altivec on 
non-ppc or mmx on non-x86).  Here we list the masked ones.

.I Format:
.br
\- comments begin with #
.br
\- one USE flag per line
.TP
.BR virtuals
This controls what packages will provide a virtual by default.  For example, 
if a package needs to send e-mail, it will need virtual/mta.  In the absence 
of a package that provides virtual/mta (like qmail, sendmail, postfix, etc...), 
portage will look here to see what package to use.  In this case, Gentoo uses 
net-mail/ssmtp as the default (as defined in the virtuals file) because it's 
the package that does the very bare minimum to send e-mail.

.I Format:
.br
\- comments begin with #
.br
\- one virtual and DEPEND atom base pair per line

.I Example:
.br
# use net-mail/ssmtp as the default mta
.br
virtual/mta           net-mail/ssmtp
.br
# use app-dicts/aspell-en as the default dictionary
.br
virtual/aspell-dict   app-dicts/aspell-en
.RE
.TP
.BR /etc/portage/
.RS
.TP
.BR bashrc
If needed this file can be used to setup a different environment for ebuilds 
than the root environment.  Syntax is the same as any other bash script.
.TP
.BR package.mask
List of DEPEND atoms to mask.  Useful if specific versions of packages do not 
work well for you.  For example, you swear by the Nvidia drivers, but only 
versions earlier than 1.0.4496.  No problem!

.I Format:
.br
\- comments begin with #
.br
\- one DEPEND atom per line

.I Example:
.br
# mask out versions 1.0.4496 of the nvidia
.br
# drivers and later
.br
>=media-video/nvidia-kernel-1.0.4496
.br
>=media-video/nvidia-glx-1.0.4496
.TP
.BR package.unmask
Just like package.mask above except here you list packages you want to 
unmask.  Useful for overriding the global package.mask file (see 
below).  Note that this does not override packages that are masked via 
KEYWORDS.
.TP
.BR package.keywords
Per package KEYWORDS.  Useful for mixing unstable packages in with a normally 
stable machine or vice versa.  This will allow you to augment ACCEPT_KEYWORDS 
for a single package.

.I Format:
.br
\- comments begin with #
.br
\- one DEPEND atom per line followed by additional ACCEPT_KEYWORDS 

.I Example:
.br
# always use unstable libgd
.br
media-libs/libgd ~x86
.br
# only use stable mplayer
.br
media-video/mplayer -~x86
.br
# use a package that is marked -*
.br
>=sys-kernel/linux-headers-2.6 -*
.TP
.BR package.use
Per-package USE flags.  Useful for tracking local USE flags or for 
enabling USE flags for only certain packages.  Perhaps you develop GTK 
and thus you want documentation for it, but you don't want 
documentation for QT.  Easy as pie my friend!

.I Format:
.br
\- comments begin with #
.br
\- one DEPEND atom per line followed by space separated list of USE flags

.I Example:
.br
# turn on docs for GTK 2.x
.br
=x11-libs/gtk+-2* doc
.br
# disable mysql support for QT
.br
x11-libs/qt -mysql
.TP
.BR mirrors
Whenever portage encounters a mirror:// style URL it will look up the actual 
hosts here.  If the mirror set is not found here, it will check the global 
mirrors file at /usr/portage/profiles/thirdpartymirrors.  You may also set a 
special mirrortype called "local".  This list of mirrors will be checked 
before GENTOO_MIRRORS and be used even if the package has 
RESTRICT="nomirror".

.I Format:
.br
\- comments begin with #
.br
\- mirror type followed by a list of hosts

.I Example:
.br
# local private mirrors used only by my company
.br
local ftp://192.168.0.3/mirrors/gentoo http://192.168.0.4/distfiles

# people in japan would want to use the japanese mirror first
.br
sourceforge http://keihanna.dl.sourceforge.net/sourceforge

# people in tawain would want to use the local gnu mirror first
.br
gnu ftp://ftp.nctu.edu.tw/UNIX/gnu/
.TP
.BR categories
A simple list of valid categories that may be used in /usr/portage, 
PORTDIR_OVERLAY, and PKGDIR (see \fBmake.conf\fR(5)).  This allows for custom 
categories to be created.

.I Format:
.br
\- one category per line

.I Example:
.br
app-hackers
.br
media-other
.RE
.TP
.BR /usr/portage/profiles/
Global Gentoo settings that are controlled by the developers.  To override 
these settings, you can use the files in \fB/etc/portage/\fR.
.RS
.TP
.BR arch.list
A list of all valid KEYWORDS.  This does not include modifiers.

.I Format:
.br
\- one KEYWORD per line

.I Example:
.br
x86
.br
ppc
.br
sparc
.TP
.BR categories
A simple list of valid categories that may be used in /usr/portage, 
PORTDIR_OVERLAY, and PKGDIR (see \fBmake.conf\fR(5)).

.I Format:
.br
\- one category per line

.I Example:
.br
app-admin
.br
dev-lang
.br
games-strategy
.br
sys-kernel
.TP
.BR package.mask
This contains a list of DEPEND atoms for packages that should not be installed 
in any profile.  Useful for adding the latest KDE betas and making sure no 
one accidently upgrades to them.  Also useful for quickly masking specific 
versions due to security issues.  ALWAYS include a comment explaining WHY the 
package has been masked and WHO is doing the masking.

.I Format:
.br
\- comments begin with #
.br
\- one DEPEND atom per line

.I Example:
.br
# masked for security reasons
.br
<sys-libs/zlib-1.1.4
.br
# <caleb@gentoo.org> (10 Sep 2003)
.br
# new kde betas
.br
=kde-base/kde-3.2.0_beta1
.br
=kde-base/kdeaccessibility-3.2.0_beta1
.TP
.BR thirdpartymirrors
Controls the mapping of mirror:// style URLs to actual lists of 
mirrors.  Keeps us from overloading a single server.

.I Format:
.br
\- comments begin with #
.br
\- mirror type followed by a list of hosts

.I Example:
.br
sourceforge http://aleron.dl.sourceforge.net/sourceforge http://unc.dl.sourceforge.net/sourceforge

gentoo http://distro.ibiblio.org/pub/linux/distributions/gentoo/distfiles/ ftp://ftp.gtlib.cc.gatech.edu/pub/gentoo/distfiles

kernel http://www.kernel.org/pub http://www.us.kernel.org/pub
.TP
.BR use.desc
All global USE flags must be listed here with a description of what they do.  

.I Format:
.br
\- comments begin with #
.br
\- use flag \- some description

.I Example:
.br
3dfx - Adds support for 3dfx video cards
.br
acl - Adds support for Access Control Lists
.br
doc - Adds extra documentation
.TP
.BR use.local.desc
All local USE flags must be listed here along with the package and a 
description.

.I Format:
.br
\- comments begin with #
.br
\- package:use flag \- description

.I Example:
.br
app-editors/nano:justify - Toggle the justify option
.br
dev-games/clanlib:clanJavaScript - Enables javascript support
.br
dev-libs/DirectFB:fusion - add Multi Application support
.br
games-emulation/xmess:net - Add network support
.TP
.BR use.mask
Just like the \fBuse.mask\fR found in \fB/etc/make.profile/\fR.  See 
above for more information.
.RE
.TP
.BR /var/cache/edb/
.RS
.TP
.BR virtuals
Everytime a package is emerged that provides a virtual, that virtual to package 
mapping is recorded here.

.I Format:
.br
\- the virtual followed by the DEPEND atom bases that provide it

.I Example:
.br
virtual/inetd sys-apps/xinetd
.br
virtual/opengl media-video/nvidia-glx x11-base/xfree
.br
virtual/mta net-mail/qmail
.br
virtual/editor app-editors/vim app-editors/nano
.TP
.BR world
Every time you emerge a package, the package that you requested is 
recorded here.  Then when you run `emerge world -up`, the list of 
packages is read from this file.  Note that this does not mean that the 
packages that were installed as dependencies are listed here.  For 
example, if you run `emerge mod_php` and you do not have apache 
already, then "dev-php/mod_php" is recorded in the world file but 
"net-www/apache" is not.  For more information, review \fBemerge\fR(1).

.I Format:
.br
\- one DEPEND atom base per line

.I Example:
.br
games-misc/fortune-mod-gentoo-dev
.br
dev-libs/uclibc
.br
app-cdr/cdemu
.RE
.SH AUTHORS
Marius Mauch <genone@gentoo.org>
.br
Mike Frysinger <vapier@gentoo.org>
.br
Drake Wyrm <wyrm@haell.com>
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Please report bugs via http://bugs.gentoo.org/
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR emerge (1),
.BR ebuild (1),
.BR ebuild (5),
.BR make.conf (5)
.SH "CVS HEADER"
$Header$
