.TH "TOOLCHAIN-FUNCS.ECLASS" "5" "Jun 2003" "Portage 2.0.51" "portage"
.SH "NAME"
toolchain-funcs \- functions to get commonly needed info about the 
toolchain (binutils/gcc/glibc/etc...)
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
The \fBtoolchain-funcs\fR eclass contains a suite of functions that are 
used to glean information about the toolchain that is used to compile.  
This allows developers to worry about gcc specs rather than figuring
out how to find the specs in the first place.
.SH "FUNCTIONS"
.TP
.B tc-getAR
Returns the name of the binutils archiver.  Usually 'ar'.
.TP
.B tc-getAS
Returns the name of the assembler.  Usually 'as'.
.TP
.B tc-getBUILD_CC
Returns the name of the compiler for the build system.  
Useful only when you have to compile and run a utility while 
building the package.
.TP
.B tc-getCC
Returns the name of the C compiler binary.  Usually 'gcc'.
.TP
.B tc-getCXX
Returns the name of the C++ compiler binary.  Usually 'g++'.
.TP
.B tc-getLD
Returns the name of the linker.  Usually 'ld'.
.TP
.B tc-getNM
Returns the name of the symbol/object thingy.  Usually 'nm'.
.TP
.B tc-getRANLIB
Returns the name of the archiver indexer.  Usually 'ranlib'.
.TP
.B gcc-fullversion
Returns the version as by `$CC -dumpversion`.
.br
GCC \fI2.95.3\fR will return \fI2.95.3\fR
.br
GCC \fI3.2.1\fR will return \fI3.2.1\fR
.TP
.B gcc-version
Returns the version, but only the <major>.<minor>.
.br
GCC \fI2.95\fR.3 will return \fI2.95\fR
.br
GCC \fI3.2\fR.1 will return \fI3.2\fR
.TP
.B gcc-major-version
Returns the Major version.
.br
GCC \fI2\fR.95.3 will return \fI2\fR
.br
GCC \fI3\fR.2.1 will return \fI3\fR
.TP
.B gcc-minor-version
Returns the Minor version.
.br
GCC 2.\fI95\fR.3 will return \fI95\fR
.br
GCC 3.\fI2\fR.1 will return \fI2\fR
.TP
.B gcc-micro-version
Returns the Micro version.
.br
GCC 2.95.\fI3\fR will return \fI3\fR
.br
GCC 3.2.\fI1\fR will return \fI1\fR
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Please report bugs via http://bugs.gentoo.org/
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ebuild (5)
.SH "FILES"
.BR /usr/portage/eclass/toolchain-funcs.eclass
.SH "AUTHORS"
Mike Frysinger <vapier@gentoo.org>
.SH "CVS HEADER"
$Header$
